I'm Vicki MacDonald and I'm at Holy Trinity Church, Llandudno, during the longest yarn.
And I'm speaking to Wendy Lonsdale, who has memories of her parents during the war.
Wendy, what do you want to tell me?
Well, I was born in 1941, so I was always called a war baby.
My mother used to, we lived actually in Porta Gueste and we had an antique business in Port
Madoc.
So when the phony war came, my mother panicked and thought that the Germans were going to
land on Black Rock Sands.
And so she started taking all her valuable antiques down into the cellar until I think
my father told her not to be so silly.
So that was the first story that I can recall.
And I do remember that my father was in the Home Guard in the first few years of the war
and he was stationed up below Snowdon, near Capelkirig, guarding the line, the pipeline,
which was water.
I gather it was water.
Yes.
But I didn't hear very much about that.
And then at the beginning of the war, anybody who had a house with a spare bedroom was told
they had to take members of the services or they had to have somebody to live with them.
So my mother decided, or evacuees, so my mother said, oh, well, we've got the premises,
above the shop.
We'll go down to the shop and live over the shop in Port Madduck and we'll let a family
come and live in our house in Borthogest.
And I'm not quite sure how long we were there, but I was born over the shop.
And I remember my mother saying to her mother, well, I don't remember this, but she told
me this, that, oh, I can't possibly have a baby over the shop.
And my grandmother apparently said, you'd be surprised where you can have a baby.
So during the war, obviously, I was a baby.
And my mother took me on the, I think we must have had a, we went by taxi, I think, to Liverpool,
because that's where her mother and father lived in Liverpool, but not in Liverpool itself,
out in Great Crosby.
My grandmother apparently used to say, they'd telephone and say, do you think it's safe
to come?
And my grandmother said, well, there haven't been any bombs recently.
I think you're safe to come.
So then apparently we were, I was taken as a baby in arms up to Liverpool.
And as soon as we got there, the bombs started dropping.
And at nearly the end of the war, my father had then been called up because he was older.
He was called up and he was in the Royal Corps of Signals and doing, learning how to do
codes and things like that.
And he was, I remember he was in Scarborough.
And for some reason we went to stay in Scarborough.
We went on the train.
And I can remember going on the train and all the soldiers on the train, sort of making
a big fuss of me because I was a little girl.
And we got to Scarborough and stayed there a few days, I suppose.
Those are my earliest memories.
You told me one memory about your mother and the knives.
And yes, so because it was an antique shop, she had a lot of, well, knives, very obviously
very dangerous knives from the Far East.
And there were Dutch commandos stationed, I think near Harlech.
And they came into the shop and wanted to know if she had any sharp knives because we'll
get the so-and-so's.
They were going out to the Far East.
They were stationed.
And she sold them, the knives.
Oh yes, yeah, she sold whatever she had.
She was glad to get rid of them, I think.
What else was?
You had, your mother had quite a busy wartime.
There were other memories?
And the other, yes, well, so then talking about the being, because I was born in, over
the shop, as it were, the house was, she obviously...
Sorry, I stopped the tape for a moment.
And Wendy's going to continue.
Just to say that a family came from London and lived in our house during the war.
Evacuees.
Well, I suppose you'd call them evacuees, but yes, it was a family.
It was instead of having soldiers, I suppose, because otherwise we'd have had soldiers living
in it.
And it was a very nice bungalow in Borthogest.
So thank you, Wendy.
Thank you for your wonderful memories of the war and your mother's war as well.
So did she survive it all and the antique shop stayed open after the war?
Indeed, yes, until 1950s.
Oh, that was lovely.
Thank you so much.
Thank you for doing that.